                          THE FREEDOM COVENANT

                      Version 1.0, March 30, 2021


Free Software is all about freedom. This freedom, as Richard Stallman repeatedly
pointed out, is not about "free beer", but about "free speech". In other words,
the freedom of free software corresponds not to the French word "gratuit", but
to a much nobler word, "Liberté", the first of the three pillars of the French
motto, "Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité".

Freedom has always been under attack, and Free Software is no exception.
The natural tendency of human beings is to grab power, and achieving that
objective very often requires, in the mind of the power grabber, the restriction
of freedom of others. From shrink-wrap licenses to dictatorial regimes, the same
principle applies in a continuum: restricting someone's freedom to gain power.

It takes courageous individuals to go against that innate desire for power and
truly defend freedom. Courage is needed because accepting the freedom for
others requires a deliberate and conscious restraint of one's own.

This document is a covenant that you can freely adopt as a reminder of what it
takes to truly respect the freedom of others around you. Here are the guiding
principles of this covenant:

      0. Act out of love
      1. Speak the truth
      2. Share your facts
      3. Mind your feelings
      4. Keep your opinions
      5. Forgive and apologize
      6. Discuss
      7. Contribute and be thankful
      8. No threat, no retribution
      9. Judge privately
     10. Act out of love

By adhering to this covenant, you simply agree that these principles are in line
with how you want to act, and you encourage others to gently remind you of these
principles should you violate them.


                        END OF THE FREEDOM COVENANT

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you agree with this covenant, simply share it along, for example by putting
it in your repositories or on your web sites. If you disagree with part or all
of the wording, feel free to make alterations and to share your suggestions back
to https://github.com/c3d/freedom-covenant or
   https://gitlab.com/c3d/freedom-covenant

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                DISCUSSION

Here is a more in-depth discussion of the meaning of the principles outlined
above, highlighting how and why they relate to freedom.


0. Act out of love

The best contributors to Free Software are often very passionate individuals,
who can talk about their projects for hours, and more if beer is involved.
This passion can be harnessed in a positive way, but it can also easily lead
down a destructive path, including anger or hatred.

Love, whether for individuals or for the products you work on, is the best
remedy against such negative passions. By loving others, you can fully enjoy
their freedom, and be happy with them when they exercise it.

When individual you love do something that you disagree with, acting out of love
will ensure that you seek a resolution that is in their best interest, instead
of attempting to gain control over them and restrain their freedom.

Even in the worst case, we should seek to act towards one another like a parent
teaching a misbehaving kid more than like a cop putting a criminal in jail.


1. Speak the truth

Freedom applies to yourself, and that includes your right to say what you
believe to be true, irrespective of what others may think about it.

If you are in a position where you cannot say what you truly believe, your
liberty has already been infringed upon. It is already way past time to find the
courage to speak up. Be ready for the consequences, because those who reveal
inconvenient truths are not welcome by those who need silence to preserve
their own power. This is one of the prices to pay for freedom.

Like all others, this principle is subject to principle 0. You may chose to
refrain from stating things that you believe to be true, simply because they may
cause harm to others. You need to carefully balance the need for openness and
transparency with the right to privacy or beliefs.

Be mindful that you don't own the objective truth. You can at best state what
you sincerely believe is true. As a result, you need to fully accept that
others, following the same guiding principle, may still end up with a different
or even opposite belief. Speaking the truth requires remaining open to the truth
at all times, and therefore being ready to change your mind.

The right to shout "fire" in a crowded theater is often cited as an example of
limit to free speech. But if there is a fire, you should feel obligated to shout
"fire" even if this may cause a panic and other harm.


2. Share your facts

True freedom depends on accurate information. Nobody can make an informed
decision without having correct data.

Therefore, your respect for the freedom of others require that you share any
fact you have that is relevant to their own decision making. This sharing
should include not just the conclusions, but also ways for others to verify your
facts, such as sources, tools or methods.

To understand how this relates to freedom, imagine that you get run over by a
bus. Do others around you still have a way to make progress without you? If not,
would it be because you held onto a parcel of personal power? Do not
deliberately hold to information even if that grants you a little more power.


3. Mind your feelings

We all have feelings, and they may be overwhelming. Unlike facts, however,
feelings are difficult to share and communicate, and they are often not directly
relevant or applicable to others.

As a result, there are two equally bad ways to deal with feelings: bottling them
up, or treating them as universal facts.

Bottling feelings up is bad, because it will lead you to behaviors that will
appear erratic or hard to understand to others. In doing so, you deprive them of
facts that are actually relevant in their interaction with you.

On the other hand, your feelings are not universally acceptable facts. They are
personal emotions that others may not feel at all. This includes feelings such
as outrage, pride, joy or love.

It is perfectly OK to share that you are outraged by someone's actions, but it
is not acceptable to demand that everyone be outraged the same way, just as it
is ridiculous to assume that everyone loves chocolate simply because you do.


4. Keep your opinions

Like feelings, opinions are personal. Like feelings, they can be shared, but
they will not be universally accepted.

If you have trouble distinguishing facts from opinions, a good rule of thumb is
that opinions are ideas others can disagree with. The vast majority of what we
often incorrectly treat as facts are, in reality, mere opinions. This include
all the statements in this document, which represent only the opinions of its
author.

Freedom includes the freedom of opinion. This means that you can keep your
opinion and do not have to subject it to any kind of majority rule. Dissenting
opinions are what fueled progress in science. Of course, try to be as informed
as possible in your opinions, but remain aware of what you don't know.

Treat your opinions and the opinions of others with the same respect. If you
cannot hear a dissenting opinion without feeling uncomfortable, work on yourself
before trying to change other people's mind. If only because the chances that
you can change yourself are much higher.

It's better to end a conversation with "I learned something today" than with
"let's agree to disagree". The first sentence acknowledges the other person's
opinion and opens the discussion, the second sentence is a sneaky way to state
that you feel your opinion is superior and to shut down any further dialogue.


5. Forgive and apologize

We all make mistakes. What makes a difference is how we deal with them.

Even without any ill-will or deliberate intent, we may cause harm. Apologies
help soothe bad feelings, irrespective of any objective fault. I am often not
the best person to judge if someone else was harmed by what I did, so I'd better
be cautious and conservative about it. Feel free to apologize even if you truly
believe you did nothing wrong.

The necessary counterpart to apologies is true forgiveness. Forgiveness is not
about forgetting problems, but about putting them behind us. Since we are
creature of habit, we often repeat our mistakes, so we often need to forgive the
same person multiple times for the same offense. This is the mark of true
courage and strength.

Apologies and forgiveness restore our freedom. They allow us to return to a
normal train of thought that is not obsessed with the harm done.


6. Discuss

We are social creatures, and we cannot truly be free if we are isolated.
Do make any progress together, we need a constant exchange of ideas, an ongoing
discussion. Interrupted dialogue is often the first sign of something going
wrong.

The style of the discussion is something that is extremely personal. Individuals
that are closer to one another will often speed up the discussion by using more
direct language than they would with more distant third parties.

On our modern electronic communication channels, this often leads to incorrect
interpretation of the "tone" of the discussion, because the person who wrote had
one particular person in mind, but the message is read personally by all
others. This has been the source of many misinterpretations.

This is why it is extremely important to remember the earlier principles during
any discussion, and notably to be able to separate facts, feelings and opinions,
as well as to express quick apologies and forgiveness.

A good discussion increases the level of love, trust and respect between
participants. This is the true measure of success.


7. Contribute and be thankful

An often under-appreciated freedom is the freedom to contribute. However, this
freedom is the primary reason for the success of Free Software.

There is no obligation whatsoever to contribute, but being merely a consumer of
Free Software does not give you any particular right. What gives you a place in
the Free Software movement is the contributions you made, and nothing else.

It naturally follows that the amount and importance of individual contributions
are a primary metric and driver for the recognition they receive from the
community. This is often called "meritocracy". The hierarchy that results makes
some people uncomfortable, as being inegalitarian, or because it gives a
prominent role to an individual you disagree with for other reasons.

The correct attitude, however, is to be thankful for the contributions of
others, not to be jealous or resentful. The personal flaws of individual
contributors are generally not hard to find, but forgiveness and love should
guide us, not pettiness. Shining the spotlight on someone else's flaws may not
be the best way to contribute to the community.


8. No threat, no retribution

In a number of recent cases, major contributors have been the subject to
threats, harassment or mob lynching for personal opinions or past public
statements, in particular when such statements went against powerful political
agendas.

Nothing could be further from the Free Software movement ideals than this kind
of vengeful action.. Harassment does not serve the cause of freedom. Mob
lynching does not serve the cause of justice.

As an individual, anyone is perfectly entitled to their own opinions. Anyone
should feel free to express them privately or publicly. The limit of one
person's freedom, however, is other people's freedom.

Nobody has any right whatsoever to threaten another individual or to demand
retribution against them. Such demands should be politely ignored or laughed
at, because they are direct attacks on freedom itself.

Sharing facts requires us to acknowledge that such attacks are been made, on an
all-too-regular basis, by members of our own community. If you adhere to this
covenant, chances are you may also want to speak up against such actions, which
are a dark stain of petty dictatorship on the Free Software movement.


9. Judge privately

This does not mean that you should not be personally critical of the actions of
an individual, and that you should not make your own judgment.

Making one's own judgment is a right and a fundamental freedom. It may guide
your personal actions and decisions. However, do not be too quick to being
overly judge mental, in particular in public.

Always prefer forgiveness, always put love first. Try to make the community
better by making individuals better. It's always more difficult to discuss,
convince and forgive than to silence, coerce and punish. However, it is the
right thing to do, and this is what our community demands.


10. Act out of love

This brings us back full circle.

Act out of love to bring the best in yourself and in the community.
